Introduce DomainMetadata action to delta spec (#1742)
delta-io/delta: PROTOCOL.md

    - [Protocol Evolution](#protocol-evolution)
    - [Commit Provenance Information](#commit-provenance-information)

>     - [Increase Row ID High-Water Mark](#increase-row-id-high-watermark)

Reviewer: +100 to this idea!

>     - [Increase Row ID High-Water Mark](#increase-row-id-high-watermark)

Author: Exactly, that is our motivation to harmonize all similar actions into `DomainMetadata` action such as `RowIdHighWaterMark` and `SetTransaction`.  We will follow up on the conversion.

Actions modify the state of the table and they are stored both in delta files and in checkpoints.
This section lists the space of available actions as well as their schema.

> ### Change M*etadata

Reviewer 2: Stray `*` ?

}
```

> ### Domain Metadata

Author: Yes, ideally we hope to merge `SetTransaction` into the `DomainMetadata`. We will follow up the conversion.

> The domain metadata action contains a configuration (string key/value pairs) for a named metadata domain. Two overlapping transactions conflict if they both contain a domain metadata action for the same metadata domain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The domain metadata action contains a configuration (string-string map) for a named metadata domain. Two overlapping transactions conflict if they both contain a domain metadata action for the same metadata domain.
```

Author: fixed

> There are two types of metadata domains:

Reviewer 2: There seems to be some mixing and matching of "domain metadata" vs. "metadata domains."

I _think_ "metadata domain" is the concept (the ability to track some domain-specific metadata), and "domain metadata" is the corresponding log cation (`domainMetadata`)? 

Or is it just mixed and we should harmonize the wording?

Author: As you mentioned, `metadata domain` is more like a concept and its metadata is stored into the action named `DomainMetadata`. I made this intentionally so that readers (at least to me) can easier understand `User-controlled metadata domain` and `system-controlled metadata domain`. The word `domain` is matched with a feature

> 1. **User-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with anything other than the `delta.` prefix. Any Delta client implementation can modify these metadata domains, and can allow users to modify them arbitrarily. Delta clients and user applications are encouraged to use a naming convention designed to avoid conflicts with other clients' or users' metadata domains (e.g. `com.databricks.` vs. `com.amazon.` vs. `org.apache.`).

Author: Agree, fixed

2. **System-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with the `delta.` prefix. Only Delta client implementations are allowed to modify the metadata for system-controlled domains. A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands. System-controlled metadata domains are used by various table features and each table feature may impose additional semantics on the metadata domains it uses. `delta.` prefix is reserved for metadata domains mentioned in the Delta spec (e.g. as part of some table feature).

The schema of the `domainMetadata` action is as follows:

Field Name | Data Type | Description
-|-|-
domain | String | Identifier for this domain (system- or user-provided)

> configuration | Map[String, String] | A map containing configuration for the metadata domain

Reviewer 2: What, exactly, is a "configuration" here? Should we call it "metadata" instead?
As in, `domainMetadata.domain` and `domainMetadata.metadata` ?

Author: `configuration` is preferred to match the same field name in the `Metadata` Action. They are similar in their concept which tracks configurations for the action.

Reviewer 2: I don't love that naming for the `Metadata` action either... but agree we should probably be consistent.

removed | Boolean | When `true`, the action serves as a tombstone to logically delete a metadata domain

The following is an example `domainMetadata` action:
```json
{
  "domainMetadata": {
    "domain": "delta.deltaTableFeatureX",
    "configuration": {"key1": "..."},
    "removed": false
  }
}
```

# Action Reconciliation
A given snapshot of the table can be computed by replaying the events committed to the table in ascending order by commit version. A given snapshot of a Delta table consists of:

 - A single `protocol` action
 - A single `metaData` action
 - At most one `rowIdHighWaterMark` action
 - A collection of `txn` actions with unique `appId`s
 - A collection of `domainMetadata` actions with unique `domain`s.

>  - A collection of `add` actions with unique `(path, deletionVector.uniqueId)` keys.

Author: Since this is a small change I would suggest add it in this change. But if the delta community thinks this is better left out, I can remove it

}
```

### Domain Metadata
The domain metadata action contains a configuration (string-string map) for a named metadata domain. Two overlapping transactions conflict if they both contain a domain metadata action for the same metadata domain.

There are two types of metadata domains:

> 1. **User-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with anything other than the `delta.` prefix. Any Delta client implementation or user application can modify these metadata domains, and can allow users to modify them arbitrarily. Delta clients and user applications are encouraged to use a naming convention designed to avoid conflicts with other clients' or users' metadata domains (e.g. `com.databricks.*` or `org.apache.*`).

Reviewer 2: How should a client handle user-controlled metadata domains, especially ones it doesn't recognize? 
I guess it should propagate the metadata domain unmodified on the write path, and ignore it on the read path, but the spec should probably say so?

Reviewer 2: Looks good so far -- we can use new comments in those new sections to nitpick any wording changes there.

> 2. **System-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with the `delta.` prefix. Only Delta client implementations are allowed to modify the metadata for system-controlled domains. A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands. System-controlled metadata domains are used by various table features and each table feature may impose additional semantics on the metadata domains it uses. `delta.` prefix is reserved for metadata domains mentioned in the Delta spec (e.g. as part of some table feature).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **System-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with the `delta.` prefix. This prefix is reserved for metadata domains mentioned in the Delta spec (i.e. as part of some table feature), and Delta client implementations must not allow users to modify the metadata for system-controlled domains. A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands. System-controlled metadata domains are used by various table features and each table feature may impose additional semantics on the metadata domains it uses.
```

> 2. **System-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with the `delta.` prefix. Only Delta client implementations are allowed to modify the metadata for system-controlled domains. A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands. System-controlled metadata domains are used by various table features and each table feature may impose additional semantics on the metadata domains it uses. `delta.` prefix is reserved for metadata domains mentioned in the Delta spec (e.g. as part of some table feature).

Reviewer 2: > A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands

How should clients handle a system metadata domain they don't understand? Are system metadata domains _always_ associated with some table feature that would block writing and/or reading the table? Or should the client basically just treat it like a user metadata domain at that point?

Reviewer 2: I could imagine system-controlled domains for which the default domain handling suffices (writers don't erase or modify its content), but which are documented in the Delta spec and thus can be manipulated by a client who actually understands them? This would cover any kind of auxiliary/optional information that isn't important enough to force the compat requirements that come with a table feature, but where it would still be nice if other readers didn't actively destroy the domain's info? Maybe something like query optimizer stats that don't need to be perfectly up to date, so it's better to let an older/unaware client to propagate the existing (now stale) entry,  rather than block that client or delete the stats?

2. **System-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with the `delta.` prefix. This prefix is reserved for metadata domains mentioned in the Delta spec (i.e. as part of some table feature), and Delta client implementations must not allow users to modify the metadata for system-controlled domains. A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands. System-controlled metadata domains are used by various table features and each table feature may impose additional semantics on the metadata domains it uses.

The schema of the `domainMetadata` action is as follows:

Field Name | Data Type | Description
-|-|-
domain | String | Identifier for this domain (system- or user-provided)
configuration | Map[String, String] | A map containing configuration for the metadata domain
removed | Boolean | When `true`, the action serves as a tombstone to logically delete a metadata domain

Enablement:
- The table must be on Writer Version 7.
- A feature name `domainMetadata` must exist in the table's `writerFeatures`.

#### Reader Requirements for Domain Metadata

> The reader should only read those domains they understand and ignore those it doesn't recognize.

Reviewer 2: I think readers need to preserve all domains even if they don't understand them. We wouldn't expect the reader to understand specific user-controlled domains in the first place (user/app controls those), and system-controlled domains that need special reader attention are required to be part of some reader-writer table feature that can specify the desired behavior.

Author: Thanks, that makes sense. I reworded here based on the suggestion.

#### Write Requirements for Domain Metadata

> The writer should propagate those domains it doesn't recognize.

Reviewer 2: I think writes would be similar to reads (see comment above):
* Any system-controlled domain that needs special attention from a writer should be part of a table feature that can specify the desired behavior
* Writers must not allow users to modify or delete system-controlled domains.
* Writers must only modify or delete system-controlled domains they understand.

Author: Thanks, that makes sense. I reworded here based on the suggestion.

}
```

### Domain Metadata
The domain metadata action contains a configuration (string-string map) for a named metadata domain. Two overlapping transactions conflict if they both contain a domain metadata action for the same metadata domain.

There are two types of metadata domains:
1. **User-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with anything other than the `delta.` prefix. Any Delta client implementation or user application can modify these metadata domains, and can allow users to modify them arbitrarily. Delta clients and user applications are encouraged to use a naming convention designed to avoid conflicts with other clients' or users' metadata domains (e.g. `com.databricks.*` or `org.apache.*`).

> 2. **System-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with the `delta.` prefix. This prefix is reserved for metadata domains mentioned in the Delta spec (i.e. as part of some table feature), and Delta client implementations must not allow users to modify the metadata for system-controlled domains. A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands. System-controlled metadata domains are used by various table features and each table feature may impose additional semantics on the metadata domains it uses.

Author: @ryan-johnson-databricks , somehow I lost your previous comment in my git comment history. Let me try to understand what you mean here.

>  I could imagine system-controlled domains for which the default domain handling suffices (writers don't erase or modify its content), but which are documented in the Delta spec and thus can be manipulated by a client who actually understands them?

The current spec doesn't mention how the users who understand a domain manipulate the domain metadata and we should say something here. Is that right understanding?
I don't have an answer here honestly since it is depending on the table feature who used this domain.  I am thinking any future table feature who utilizes the domain metadata should specify it in their own delta spec section. But any suggestions here is appreciated.

> This would cover any kind of auxiliary/optional information that isn't important enough to force the compat requirements that come with a table feature, but where it would still be nice if other readers didn't actively destroy the domain's info? Maybe something like query optimizer stats that don't need to be perfectly up to date, so it's better to let an older/unaware client to propagate the existing (now stale) entry, rather than block that client or delete the stats?

sorry, I don't follow here. Is this something related how to handle two concurrent transitions that commit the same domain metadata?

Reviewer 2: You are correct that a table feature should specify how to interpret, modify, and resolve conflicts for a given system-controlled metadata domain. I was referring to the possibility of two sub-flavors:
1. A writer table feature might include some metadata domains that aware readers _could_ leverage in some way to their advantage, but which unaware readers can safely ignore without causing correctness issues.
2. A "ghostly" table feature which both readers and writers can safely ignore if they don't know about it. Such features should still be documented in the Delta spec, but not as table features that might cause compat concerns -- clients can choose whether to implement support or not.

The hypothetical optimizer stats example I gave above would be an example of a "ghost" feature -- if a reader ignores such stats, they might produce an inferior query plan but otherwise no harm. If a writer ignores such stats (as in, merely propagates them blindly per the metadata domain spec, but does not try to update them in response to changing data), then the stats would slowly go stale and become less useful over time. But that's actually not a problem -- most database engines I know of anyway don't try to recompute such stats at every update, because it's too expensive and the stats normally evolve quite slowly.

> Is this something related to how to handle two concurrent transitions that commit the same domain metadata?

An unaware writer should never try to update an unrecognized metadata domain, so it should never cause a transaction conflict -- "blindly propagating" the metadata domain means the commit should not mention it (neither as added nor as removed), and thus satisfies the general conflict resolution rules for metadata domains which this PR already includes.

Reviewer 2: I think it's enough not _require_ that every system-controlled metadata domain _must_ be part of a table feature (it just needs to be documented in the Delta spec). That should suffice, when combined with the proposed wording on reader/writer requirements: If a system-controlled metadata domain needs special handling, that's when it becomes a breaking change and needs to be part of a table feature (just like any other breaking change)

Author: Got it, I removed the `(i.e. as part of some table feature)` in this sentence without requiring that it must be in a table feature. Thanks for the feedback!

The schema of the `domainMetadata` action is as follows:

Field Name | Data Type | Description
-|-|-
domain | String | Identifier for this domain (system- or user-provided)
configuration | Map[String, String] | A map containing configuration for the metadata domain

> removed | Boolean | When `true`, the action serves as a tombstone to logically delete a metadata domain

Reviewer 2: We should probably make clear how clients (especially writers) should handle the configuration field for a tombstone metadata domain with `removed=true`, e.g. exactly one of:
 * Writers should omit the configuration entirely (null or missing)
 * Writers should write an empty configuration
 * Writers should preserve an accurate pre-image of the configuration
 * The configuration is unspecified and readers should ignore it

Enablement:
- The table must be on Writer Version 7.
- A feature name `domainMetadata` must exist in the table's `writerFeatures`.

#### Reader Requirements for Domain Metadata
- Readers must preserve all domains even if they don't understand them, i.e. the snapshot read must include them.
- Any system-controlled domain that requires special attention from a reader is a [breaking change](#protocol-evolution), and must be part of a reader-writer table feature that specifies the desired behavior.

> #### Writer Requirements for Domain Metadata

Author: We should. Just updated it and also verified with the browser the links are working

There are two types of metadata domains:
1. **User-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with anything other than the `delta.` prefix. Any Delta client implementation or user application can modify these metadata domains, and can allow users to modify them arbitrarily. Delta clients and user applications are encouraged to use a naming convention designed to avoid conflicts with other clients' or users' metadata domains (e.g. `com.databricks.*` or `org.apache.*`).

> 2. **System-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with the `delta.` prefix. This prefix is reserved for metadata domains mentioned in the Delta spec, and Delta client implementations must not allow users to modify the metadata for system-controlled domains. A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands. System-controlled metadata domains are used by various table features and each table feature may impose additional semantics on the metadata domains it uses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **System-controlled metadata domains** have names that start with the `delta.` prefix. This prefix is reserved for metadata domains defined by the Delta spec, and Delta client implementations must not allow users to modify the metadata for system-controlled domains. A Delta client implementation should only update metadata for system-controlled domains that it knows about and understands. System-controlled metadata domains are used by various table features and each table feature may impose additional semantics on the metadata domains it uses.
```

Author: fixed

- A feature name `domainMetadata` must exist in the table's `writerFeatures`.

#### Reader Requirements for Domain Metadata
- Readers must preserve all domains even if they don't understand them.

> - Any system-controlled domains that need special attention from a reader are required to be part of a table feature that can specify the desired behavior.

Reviewer 2: Actually... should we also update that part of the spec to mention metadata domains?

> clients can assume that unrecognized actions, fields, and/or metadata domains are never required in order to correctly interpret the transaction log.

> #### Write Requirements for Domain Metadata

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Writer Requirements for Domain Metadata
```

 * The [metadata](#Change-Metadata) of the table
 * Files that have been [added and removed](#Add-File-and-Remove-File)
 * [Transaction identifiers](#Transaction-Identifiers)

>  * [Domain Metadata](#Domain-Metadata)

Reviewer: According to https://github.com/delta-io/delta/issues/1741, this adds a new feature. should we update https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md?

Reviewer 2: Oh, you're right it does need a table feature spec

Author: Good point I added an `Enablement` section to describe the writer feature requirement etc.
